Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm here today with Keegan, a fellow YouTuber
and podcaster from the YouTube channel Essential Salts, and
he's also the host of the Nietzsche podcast. And
today we're going to talk. About N Nietzsche. I
mean, I guess we are two Nietzsche enthusiasts. I've
had many Nietzsche scholars on the show and I've
been following Keegan's work for a while now, so
I thought we could have a good talk. So
Keegan, welcome to the show. It's uh very nice
to meet you and to everyone.
Thank you very much. Uh, IT'S my pleasure. Thank
you for having me.
OK, so, look, I, I, I would like to
start, uh, before we get into the topics I
prepared, I, I'm curious, what got you interested in
Nietzsche and then perhaps, uh, after that I can
also tell my personal story about that, but how
did you get into his philosophy?
I think the first time that I encountered Nietzsche
was when I was a teenager when I was
first going to college and I had a very
typical experience, uh. That many people, many young men
have, uh, I picked up Beyond Good and Evil
and opened the first pages and immediately didn't understand
what I was reading and it was sort of
looking for, you know, I had heard Nietzsche was
this radical anti-Christian and I was very much into
atheism at that time, um, you know, I guess
I still am technically, but you know, it was,
uh, the days of the new atheists. And uh
I was, that was one of the things I
was interested in in the philosophy program was learning
historical, uh, arguments or, or, you know, historical figures
who might give a different perspective, different arguments as
to why they opposed Christianity. And I could immediately
tell that I remember I went to the Antichrist
and you know, both of those books begin in
very strange ways if you're used to like this
sort of like rationalistic form of argument that the
new atheists are very famous for. He's beginning his
books by saying, suppose that truth were a woman
or let us look one another in the face.
We are hyperboreans, you know, you're immediately in kind
of strange territory, but I knew that there was
something there that I really, uh. You know, Nietzsche
is just such a wonderful writer, and such a
lyrical writer that it was very enjoyable to read
him even when I was confused about the overall
point he was making. And as I learned over
the years, uh, there, Were things that Nietzsche was
addressing, for example, in Beyond Good and Evil that
speak to the history of philosophy or metaphysics that
I wasn't yet familiar with and, um, you know,
a whole background in Nietzsche's life and his career
that I wasn't really familiar with. So it took
me many, many years. I would say probably the
course of a decade before I feel like I
was picking up Nietzsche's books and actually understanding what
I was reading and by that time I had
dropped out of school. Uh, I, or out of
university. I, I've told this story many times, but,
uh, essentially, I became a touring musician. Uh, I
decided that was the life for me, uh, which
was, you know, a stupid decision, but, you know,
uh, be willing to perish in pursuit of the
great and impossible, right? So that's what I, I
decided to do, uh, financially perish at least, and,
uh. But touring and being in a band, uh,
gives you quite a bit of time to read
and do self-directed reading and do self-directed study and
when we first started touring, you know, I, I've
always been kind of a. A Luddite or a
dinosaur, uh, maybe Luddite's the wrong word, but, you
know, when my bandmates all had smartphones, I, I
had like a BlackBerry, uh, when they, when we
first started touring, I think I had a, a
pay by minute flip phone back in 2012. So
it wasn't the same kind of, uh, situation that
we're in today where you could sort of distract
yourself, uh, very easily. Oftentimes the only thing to
do was read, and I think that was like
really good for me that, uh, At that time,
I was sort of put into a situation where,
OK, we're driving for 8 hours, what do you
have? You have your books. And it also helped
that a few of my bandmates over the years
were also interested in philosophy and we would sort
of trade books and. Um, GET one another interested
in philosophers that we might not have otherwise read.
So that was sort of my, my journey to
Nietzsche, and I remember. Uh, I think Beyond Good
and Evil is still my favorite book by Nietzsche,
but I remember that reading Birth of Tragedy while
on tour and all of the. Statements Nietzsche was
making about music and the Dionysian very much resonated
with me at that time, so that was like
one of the first books where I really felt.
That I understood Nietzsche. I was seeing eye to
eye with what he was saying, which is very
strange to think about in retrospect because there's also
very many references in that book that I still
at that time, 10 years ago, 10 years in
the past from now, I still didn't really understand.
I had to do quite a bit of reading,
so it's been like a 20 year process for
me essentially of trying to understand N Nietzsche.
Yeah, I mean for me it's been like a
seventeen-ish project. I mean, I, I'm uh I'm not,
uh as I was telling you, Before we started
recording, I'm not as, I don't have as a
systematic approach to Nietzsche as you seem to have,
but I mean, basically, uh, in school, I didn't
really like philosophy at all. I mean, I didn't
like philosophy classes also because I have a teacher.
Who was very much religious and so I was
like put off by that. And then it was
only after I finished high school that uh I
read a history book. I mean a book on
the history of Western philosophy, and then I was
like, oh, OK, there's some interesting ideas here and
then I I was a bit arrogant back then
and so I decided to read uh Kent's Critique
of Pure Reason. I, I mean, I, that's absolute
madness, having your first philosophy book being that one,
but I, I read it. Yeah, it took me
like 2 weeks, but I, I finished it and
then, uh, a little bit later, uh. I got
into N Nietzsche and my first book was The
Antichrist, just also because back then I was very
much into atheist stuff and I was like, oh,
Anti-Christ, this must be cool, you know, that sort
of, sort of immature and arrogant kind of way
of thinking that I would be able to understand
such a book. Without reading other Nietzsche books prior
to that one, but anyway, I read it. I
don't think I understood much, much of it, but
later, I mean, that was when I was 18
and then 2 years later when I was 20,
I had a summer break where I just decided
to. HEAD first into Nietzsche and started with The
Birth of Tragedy and read all the other books
in the space of two months apart from Dan,
uh, Will to Power and Nietzsche Kontra Wagner. So
I mean that's basically how I exposed myself to
Nietzsche and, and the interesting thing is that since
then. Uh, I read Will to Power and Dan,
uh, but I haven't reread, I haven't reread any
of Nietzsche's books. Basically, I was just exposed to
more Nietzsche through the work of Nietzsche's scholars. So,
I mean, that's also, I guess one of the
reasons why I don't have a very systemat system.
Thematic approach to Nietzsche. I mean, in terms of
my favorite book, I guess that, uh, it's weird
because actually I, I have very nihilistic tendencies and
Nietzsche hasn't cured me of that, but my favorite
book is still uh The Spoke Zarathustra.
Yeah, I mean, that's a good one. It's interesting.
We have kind of a similar, we both started
with like anti-Christis, one of our books, and then
both sort of rediscovered Ntzsche through Birth of Tragedy.
So that's interesting. Um, YEAH, that's cool.
Yeah, so, look, uh, I was thinking about topics
while I was preparing for our conversation. I mean,
uh, let's see how this goes, but I thought
first about talking a little bit about Nietzsche's take
on rationality. I mean, most people. I'm, I'm not
sure if most people, but at least most people
who are not that familiar with Nietzsche or are
not Nietzsche's scholars, at least they tend to, uh,
talk about him or label him as an irrationalist.
Do you think that's a good label? Uh, DO
you think that you, I mean, that he deserves
that kind of label?
Uh, NO. Uh, WOULD be the short answer. I,
I don't think irrationalist is the correct label for
Nietzsche, which I've, I've remarked on that in, in
the past on the show. I think what might
be a little confusing is that he's certainly not
a rationalist in the way all of the connotations
that normally go along with that term do not
apply to Nietzsche either, but I think when people
call Nietzsche an irrationalist. What they're saying essentially is
that he advocates for a romantic, uh, rejection of
reason itself, something like that. Irrationalist is also one
of those words that is usually not, uh, people
usually don't apply it to themselves, um, especially in,
in the philosophical, um, in philosophical endeavors, because right
at the start, you have a contradiction, right? Because
the entire thing is the operation of reason. So
what I would say about Nietzsche's position on rationality.
Is that he actually reinterprets what rationality is. He
includes an element of irrationality within rationality. But uh
to say he outright rejects it, I think would
be incorrect. And one of the ways that we
could get at this might be looking at, uh,
for example, the Platonic theory of truth, that truth
is in the idea. Uh, THE, the, you know,
the guiding question, the metaphysical question of ancient Greek
philosophy is, what is, what is it that exists?
And there's this enduring notion that what exists is
what endures, what persists, what is fixed, what is
constant, what is eternal, something like that. That's how
you get to these ideas of Parmenides and figures
like this. And Plato, as Nietzsche calls him a
systematizer, as a chimerical sort of figure who who
sort of takes from Pythagoras and Heraclitus and Parmenides
and Socrates. And weaves together a philosophy out of
them. He does still seem to hold to this
orientation, as we can see and for example, uh
the Cratetalli, that what is true is what is
and what we say exists must uh. Endure it
must not be found in the changeable material physical
world. Socrates has this dialogue where he's saying, does
true beauty exist? OR, you know, does absolute beauty
exist? His interlocutor says, yes, of course, but Socrates
says, Well, we can't find beauty in a fair
face because beauty always fades. There must be some
sort of idea of beauty, a fixed idea that
is beyond this changeable world, uh, this form of
beauty. And uh N Nietzsche says in his preface
to Beyond Good and Evil that Plato with his
idea of pure spirit and the good as such,
or the good as such, this fixed idea of
the good. Uh, DENIED perspective and therefore flipped truth
on her head. So you can see Nietzsche's view
of rationality is sort of like an inversion of
Platonism, but it's only an inversion because he says
we have things upside down essentially, that we have
this view of truth that denies becoming, it denies
perspective, it wants to again make things fixed, constant,
eternal. Uh One of Nietzsche's really interesting remarks toward
the beginning of Beyond Good and Evil is that.
Even our impulses do philosophy. They've all practiced philosophy
from time to time, and that even the philosopher's,
uh, most abstruse metaphysical activity can be understood through
his impulsive activity, that his logic is forced into
definite channels by, uh, drives, essentially drive is N
Nietzsche's word for, I'm sure you know this, but
just for the audience, it's a general term we
can usually. Use it as synonymous for impulse. That
so the philosopher's sort of telling you a story
about his impulses. Now why would Nietzsche come up
with this completely different attitude towards truth and rationality?
And I think what he's doing is he's essentially
saying that there is an element of willing within
thinking and an element of thinking within willing, that
thought does not think by itself. Thought one way
to to to conceive of this would be that
the drives or the impulses are like the headwaters
of a river, and the thought is at the
end of the river, the mouth of the river
or something like that. Um, SO, you know, uh.
I, I don't want to take that and essentialize
the drive from the thought because I think Nietzsche
is actually melding them together in a way. That's
why the river, I think is a good analogy
because it sort of speaks to that Heraclian flux
that there's not these individual states that proceed into
one another, they flow into one another, and so
that essentially every drive has its own quantum of
reason that it exercises. And so every act of
reasoning therefore involves willing, it involves valuation. Nietzsche says
valuations are physiological demands for the preservation of a
certain way of life. So essentially. Uh, WE have
an evaluative judgment, which is a necessary part of
thinking, but that judgment itself is pre-rational. Um, AND
so I know that's somewhat long winded, but essentially
what Nietzsche tries to do is bring in that
element of evaluation and therefore drive into the act
of thinking. And then therefore that necessarily means that
perspective is an act or is part of the
act of thinking. And what that results in, and
Nietzsche says, uh, the way that Plato flipped truth
on her head was to deny perspective, what this
results in is that with this like implicit platonic
view of truth, most people have this idea of
what I like to call immaculate perception. So this
God's eye view of a reality that might tell
us what the objective, what the fact of the
matter is. And Nietzsche essentially doesn't believe that we
can come to any understanding of the fact of
the matter. Independent of perspective, independent of those evaluative
judgments that shape even he says our organs of
perception, our visual organs, our eyes are shaped by
value judgments that every, uh, act of perceiving is.
Part of this evolutionary, it was created by an
evolutionary process that was driven by impulse and impulses.
Make a judgment about what is good and what
is bad essentially for the organism, maybe not in
moral terms but in pre-moral terms and so Nietzsche
rolls all that up into the activity of rationality
and that means we now have a very, very
different picture of what it means to reason, to
think or to do philosophy. But I don't think
that makes him an irrationalist, and in fact, Nietzsche
would say. I, it's my task. He, he says
again, supposing truth were a woman, we've approached her
as these sort of rigid, stuffy dogmatists, and that's
a really inexpert way at winning over a woman.
And so he, but implicit in this is the
idea of I want to be a better suture
of the truth. It's not what I don't want
to say more serious, perhaps more sincere, but part,
part of his approach is precisely not being quite
as serious and rigid and fixed in our ideas,
being a bit more carefree, and so I, I
would say that that's Nietzsche's attitude towards rationality.
Have you ever come across or read about Hugo
Mercier's um argumentative theory of reason that he developed
with Dan Sperber? I mean, there is a psycho,
a French psychologist. Have you ever heard of it?
I think so. Is this the idea that essentially
in when we're arguing with one another, we're trying
to like win or triumph rather than.
Um, YEAH, I, I, I'm, yeah, I mean that's
perhaps a simplistic way of putting it. It's basically
that we've evolved the capacity to reason, not to
arrive at truth or to build knowledge, but basically
to try to convince other people of our own
position. So it has a social function. And not
really that sort of pure epistemic function that many
philosophers and thinkers attribute to it. So, I mean,
do you think that uh Nietzsche would be in
line with, with that kind of way of approaching
uh reason or rationality that some psychologists, scientific psychologists
in recent years have, uh, I mean, the way
they've been approaching it.
I think so actually, yeah, there might be a
few like caveats or asterisks, um, to assign to
Nietzsche's view, but especially if you read what Nietzsche
has to say about the sophists. I mean, so
there's a, there's an excellent, uh. Like passage in
it's actually in the compiled materials for Nietzsche's lectures
on rhetoric when he is a college professor that
uh I, uh, it was the kind of thing
I wouldn't ever recommend to somebody who is first
starting to read Nietzsche, but for you or anyone
who's read his corpus, it's a wonderful thing to
go and take a look at because N Nietzsche,
I, I, I mean I just try to imagine
being. An unsuspecting Swiss student in 1873 and walking
into Basel into a classroom of probably like. 5
people and the professor's supposed to be teaching you
about rhetoric so you're like, OK, I'm gonna learn
about Aristotle's, uh, politics and poetics, and I'm going
to learn about all these things and then Nietzsche
comes in and, and starts making points, for example,
that, uh, lang uh rhetoric is language and the
very structure of language itself does not desire to
instruct but to convey opinions about things that, uh.
In fact, all we have is, he starts going
into like metaphysical arguments, drawing on the German idealist
tradition and saying, all we have is sensation and
representation, and that therefore, we feel a sensation, then
we try to represent it. So there's already a
degree of removal because we're creating sort of an
image from the nerve stimulus. So those are two
totally unequal things. We're indicating a series of, of,
of stimuli from an image that we've created, and
then we're translating that into a sound. That is
then supposed to produce an image that then leads
somebody to understand like this mutual intelligibility of sensation
and so he essentially says that completely anti-Platonic view
that language conveys doxy opinions, not episte, knowledge, but
that in the ancient world. The rhetoricians knew this,
and this is why he says they're willing to
make the most outlandish claims about being able to
do anything as rators and stylists because they control
the opinions about things and therefore the effect of
things upon men. Which can make sense of of
the very uh striking claims of people like Gorgius
who tells Socrates, for example, you know, uh. Uh,
THE art of rhetoric is the highest art because
you, you know, you want to talk about the
art of the money changer or the sculptor or
the gymnast. If I can go and convince him.
If I can convince the money changer to work
for me, then his art now labors in my
service. If I can embarrass the scientist or the
gymnastic teacher, even though he has greater knowledge and
has studied more, but my rhetoric is simply more
impressive. My, they, they saw rhetoric as a dynammi,
a power essentially. To sort of like impose your
view upon the world and so. Nietzsche would actually
say. Not only would, would he probably find agreement
with uh Mercia's view, but he would probably say
that this is a very, very ancient view of
what language is. It might even be one of
the original views of what language is, and that
it's only when we have this Socratic revaluation that
we begin to believe that language, uh, you know,
that it's, it's dia logos that we are somehow
teaching people the truth through logos, that we're revealing
the truth through, through our words. Um, INSTRUCTING others,
something like that, he would say that's like a,
that was a sort of revolution in thought, that
whole idea, and so I think, yeah, with some
caveats, Nietzsche would probably agree.
Yeah, you know, it's interesting. I also think about
this when I think about morality because I, as
Nietzsche was, or I mean, at least as I
understand it and as people like Brian later told
me. Um, HE was a moral anti-realist, and I'm
also a moral anti-realist, and I, I've had conversations,
uh, not for the show, they're not on the
show, but I've had conversations with philosophers, uh, about
this, particularly moral philosophers, and one of them actually
got, uh, offended by what I told him, but
basically I, I told him, you, you know, I,
I mean,
did
he
try the old, uh, so, so that, so it's
OK to eat babies. Huh, and you just said
yes. Uh,
NO, no, I, I think it was even worse
than that because basically what I told him was
that, oh, you know, nowadays, I have conversations about
ethics and morality with philosophers on the show, but
it's mostly for fun because I don't take, I
don't take his their arguments very seriously because I
know that they're basically, uh, most of their reasons.
Reasoning is post hoc rationalization. It's basically they've already
arrived or decided what the truth of the matter,
what the moral truth is, and then they, uh,
move backwards and, uh, reason to try to justify
their moral values, and I mean I guess that's
one thing that offends many moral philosophers.
How dare you have fun or how dare you
listen to people you don't already agree with, I
guess. You know, I mean, I think, uh, yeah,
Nietzsche is definitely a moral anti-realist, but I, I
guess it should be said. That whole, that's like
a very broad category which I think only makes
sense by reference to moral realism, right? Like it,
uh, we can tell who created that category. It
was the moral realists essentially, I think, because within
the category of moral anti-realism. N Nietzsche is very
different from, say, a David Hume or from, uh,
perhaps what would be another good example of like
a nihilistic or like Marquis Assad or someone like
that. There's so much variety within, uh, beyond this,
uh, walled garden of there are moral objective facts,
which I think is, I, I would share your
sort of, uh, Lighthearted laugh at that idea because
it's such, to me, it's so obviously a category
error. That that that's not, there's no, I mean
this is just, it's one of the most famous
and quotable lines of Nietzsche. There are no moral
facts at all, only interpretations of the facts, but
he says it in a sentence because that's all
it is right there. It's, it's very, very obvious
that a moral statement is, is in a different
category from describing. You know, uh, a, a, a
fact of the matter of a series of events.
Oh, OK, but wait a minute, because I'll probably
take advantage of what you said there to also
link it to the next topic. So, uh, when
he says that there's no, uh, moral facts, I
mean, does he necessarily also extend that to all
kinds of facts? I mean, he's he. But basically,
I, I, I mean, how does he approach uh
truth?
Yeah, uh, so. I would say on the one
hand, so there is a note, there's an unpublished
note. Where Nietzsche does say there are no facts,
only interpretations, he actually takes the word moral out
and it does extend it to everything. But I
think that there is actually a difference, or else
N Nietzsche, there is a difference between. Uh, TRYING
to, uh, what would we say, articulate a state
of affairs. Um, VERSUS articulate a moral interpretation of
the state of affairs. If there wasn't a difference
there, then Nietzsche wouldn't spend so much time as
he does calling himself an opponent of morality, saying
I am an immoralist, saying that the first task
of Zarathustra is to annihilate the morality that, uh,
previously existed, something like that. Part, I think. There
are many, many ways to talk about this because
it's, um, you can throw out all sorts of
pithy statements about what Nietzsche believed, but it's almost
always behooves you to get down into the weeds
to really understand the nuance of what he's saying
because as regards Zarathustra, for example. The reason why
Zarathustra must attack the conventional morality is because there
is a moral element within our current view of
truth. Um, WE can see this, for example, in
Twilight of the Idols and The Four Great Arrows.
Where Nietzsche says, like he makes a very, so
we, we talked earlier about platonic view of being.
Uh, THE truth is in the idea. It's fixed.
It's, it's enduring. Why do we have such an
idea? Well, in Twilight of Idols and the Four
Great Errors, Nietzsche says that essentially this view of
the fixed idea of being is part of a
reflex that developed. As part of the um desire
to impart moral responsibility onto the individual. Because the
ego or formerly the soul is precisely that fixed
idea of the person, which then becomes a neutral
substrate. That can sort of, is, is like, it's
like a little, it's like a wall or it's
like a sluice gate between your impulses and the
actions that you do. And uh it's this like
fixed reasoning, uh, person, the self that can act
arbitrarily, that is a voluntarily governing force. And essentially
Nietzsche says that is a that all of this
is a reflex of that need to be able
to fix moral responsibility on human beings. Why would
we need to fix moral responsibility on human beings?
Well, because, uh, the, the need to be able
to discipline and punish them, that this essentially is
part of a process of civilizing or culturating human
beings. That requires that they be made responsible for
their deeds. And uh I don't think that's necessarily
the whole story. But there is. There is something
about the fact that there is a moral demand
at the basis of many of our metaphysical claims
that makes them. Unchallengeable that makes them actually that
makes people unwilling to subject them to true inquiry,
if I may be so bold as to talk
about like true inquiry versus false. And really what
I mean by that is, and I've brought this
up before when I talked about, for example, free
will, because that's a core component of this idea.
The self has free will. That's why it can
be held morally responsible. If you listen to figures,
even people I greatly respect like Christopher Hitchens, when
they bring up the free will idea, or Jordan
Peterson had a remark about this. Uh, I think
to get into more lowbrow political commentary, uh, territory,
yeah, because Jordan Peterson is not the most reliable
intellectual out there, I guess.
No, no, no, no. Well, I was even about
to go lower than that and say like Ben
Shapiro and his debate with Alex O'Connor. They all
make this claim though that. You, you can't question
free will because of the, the moral like bulwark
that it represents essentially like our whole legal institutions,
our whole, uh, notions of human sovereignty and responsibility
and duty and obligation are all based on this
free will idea and or they'll just say, well,
people already believe it anyway. And and they're gonna
believe it no matter what, so you just shouldn't
question it. That's a very strange. Attitude or orientation,
we shouldn't even have the debate. Because either because
it's too dangerous or or people are just gonna
believe it anyway. Is that, do we find that
acceptable in any sort of philosophical realm of debate?
Not generally, no, but Nietzsche would say the reason
for that is that, so there's a, there's a
passage in, uh, I believe Will to Power, where
he says, truth is the kind of error that
we have found indispensable for life. And so he's
making truth a kind of error, which is like,
they're fundamentally in the same category. So there are
truths, but what we call truths are not that
platonic thing that's above the world. What they actually
are, are. The operating assumptions that we have found
that we cannot reason without or that we cannot
function without. And when Nietzsche lists out these things,
You know, oftentimes people will construe this as Nietzsche
saying this is why we need like. You know,
religious stories or some sort of enchantment of the
world, that element is certainly there. But when he
says, uh, in the gay science, he, he, he
has a passage where he talks about the shadow
of God. The shadow, when Buddha died, he left
a terrifying shadow in the a monstrous shadow on
the cave wall. So too, when God died, his
shadow will endure for a long time. The very
next passage, he says, He, he, he brings up,
when will we vanquish all of these shadows of
God? When will we de-deify our view of nature
and the world? But the things he lists are
for these indispensable errors, these shadows of God are
lines, forms, bodies, substance, cause and effect, duration. Essentially,
these concepts that Schopenhauer and Kant and many other
German idealists had essentially said, These are prerequisites of
even being able to reason at all. So Nietzsche
recognizes these for what they are. They're, they're again,
they're pre-rational demands. They're valuations that in order for
us to have this activity and operation of thinking
for all the advantages that thinking gives us, that's
another reason why he's not a simple irrationalist because
N Nietzsche's project is involved with thinking and, and
I would actually argue. The goals to the extent
Nietzsche has goals of his project do involve sort
of like a a transformation or overcoming of the
current state of consciousness. But, uh, nevertheless. We have
this series of assumptions that we have to make
in order to to engage in conscious thinking that
are essentially unquestionable. And so, in a way, uh,
to bring it back to your initial question. That
would put all facts sort of in the category
of interpretations, you might say, but he would say
that the moral fact as we construe it is
a special category because it actually prevents us from
making, uh, well, it prevents us from, from questioning
or interrogating those things. The other thing is it
prevents us from making new evaluations, and that's the
passage in thus book Zarathustra where he says, and
the camel, the lion, the child passage to summarize.
That every thou shalt was once an I will.
That's the other thing about these things. Nietzsche says
so oftentimes, the origin of like an idea that
we have or a belief is completely different from
the function it begins to serve, and the whole
reason why we begin to attribute such power and
importance to the belief is precisely because we forgot
the origin over long generations. So we forgot that.
When Jesus or Buddha or Plato or Manu or
Confucius or Muhammad, these are all people, uh, or
Saint Paul, Nietzsche has all listed these people as
legislators of value, people who came in and made
a value judgment and gave us a new worldview.
He said none of them doubted, they tried to
make men moral, but none of them doubted that
they had an absolute right to immorality. Why would
that be? Well, because in the very act of.
Legislating or imposing a new value on mankind. To
do so consciously, you're aware that you're Uh, imposing
an I will and turning it into a thou
shalt, whereas, uh, in order to become believed, people
have to believe it came from on high or
that it's an ancient idea or that it's, uh,
perhaps in Jungian language like a biological imperative or
something like this. Nietzsche says, uh, essentially no, uh,
that we, that's what happens when we forget the
origin was simply again, that evaluative judgment about life
that. Was artfully interposed or mediated onto our world
in order to try to improve mankind in some
way,
so, you, you know, it's very interesting because actually
with the knowledge we have today from disciplines like
sociology and cognitive science, particularly those two, it's, it's
not that hard to build a scientific case. Against,
uh, objective truth and and even objective reality. I
mean, uh, but, but particularly objective truth because, for
example, in sociology, uh, there's a particular subdiscipline that
is the sociology of of science that uh many
times people also connected to philosophy of science where
people have, uh, Studied how uh science is uh
is just another human institution that is part of
human society and that is, uh, permeable to all
different sorts of influences as any other insti uh
as any other social institution is and it's, uh,
you know, it, it gets influences from the social
environment, the cultural. Environment and then particularly in the
case of cognitive science, I've have a, I've, I
have an interview on the show with Donald Hoffman.
He's uh an evolutionary biologist and cognitive scientist, and
he also delves a little bit into physics and
he has a very interesting book, The Case Against
Reality. I mean, at a certain point, uh, I
can't, I, I can no longer follow his Argument
because it gets really extremely abstract, but basically he
presents evidence as to how uh humans as other
animals, of course we we haven't evolved to uh
have an accurate picture or an accurate perception of
reality. Actually there are many ways, and he explains
that in the book has um. If we are
more distanced in terms of our perception from reality
itself, it serves us better because we just pay
attention to specific ways that our nervous systems represent
reality that are useful from an evolutionary perspective to
serve the purpose of. Surviving and reproducing. Uh, I'm,
uh, but then, I mean, he gets into, uh,
physics and he, he also starts saying that even
space-time itself is not part of objective reality, it's
also a construct of our minds and then he
starts talking about a geometric. Figures that supposedly are
what constitute objective reality, things that people study in
physics, and that's where he loses me, not because
I, I don't think that he might be, he
might be right about that. It's just that I
don't know enough of physics to really evaluate that
evidence properly. But then, Uh, I've also had, uh,
recently an interview with Marina Dubova. She's a cognitive
scientist from the Santa Fe Institute. I, I haven't
released that interview yet, but, uh, we basically talked
about how through our, basically studying our cognitive limitations,
our cognitive biases, um, I mean, we know that.
What we do through science, the kind of knowledge
we produce through science, does not correspond to objective
reality, and I even asked her if we could
tie that to the ideas coming from Kent, for
example, uh, I mean, the idea that we don't
really have direct access to. The objective reality or
what he would call the noumenon, and we just
have access to the phenomenon or the, the world
as representation as Schopenhauer would call it, and she,
and she said, yes, that, uh, that, that's actually
very reasonable, um, and, and basically, I mean, science
or I mean, assuming, and I think it's true
that science is still the best tool that we
have, the best epistemic tool that we have at
our disposal to try step by step to get
closer to wherever objective reality is. I mean, the
knowledge produced by science is not actually about. Objective
reality itself because it's circumscribed to our cognitive limitations,
the, the limitations of our perception, uh, the fact
that it's influenced by society and culture in different
ways, and then there's also the incentives that operate
within the institution of science and so on. On
and so forth. I mean, there, there are many
different sources of scientific evidence that we can point
to, to actually build a case that would be
more or less in line with um the uh
the perspective uh Nietzsche had or the approach he
had to uh truth, so.
Yeah, it was funny before you mentioned uh Donald
Hoffman. That was actually exactly who I was thinking
of, um, which is interesting because he's, he's an
idealist, isn't he? Like, uh, or, or he's non,
uh,
I mean he, he, he talks about conscious realism.
I, I mean that's one of the. Weirdest ideas
coming from him, at least for me personally, because
he also, he's also friends with Deepak Chopra, and,
and I mean I don't want by saying that
I'm not dismissing his scientific credibility or any of
that. Donald Hoffman is a legit scientist. It's just
that. I mean, I don't know that idea that
it's us through our collective consciousness that construct the
version of reality we have access to. Uh, I
mean, maybe, but I'm not sure what that means
exactly. Well, I think the most compelling way that
I've heard him put it is that. You know,
we could, we can look at the behavior of,
uh, you know, we can study protons and electrons
under a microscope, an incredibly powerful microscope, and then
we can develop the mathematical formula that shows that
will predict their movements, and we can look at,
you know, you combine these atoms, you get this
molecule, and so on and so forth. But he
says that what essentially we forget. Is that what
we're looking at is actually a pixel. He uses
that analogy of uh a pixel on, you know,
your computer screen that the pixel is not actually
the thing itself, it's a representation of it and
that. I think N Nietzsche has an interesting position
on this because there's a passage in the gay
science, I believe it's right at the beginning of
book two. Where he talks about people who call
themselves realists, he's referring to sort of like scientific
realists or people who call themselves atomists. He goes
at them and beyond good and evil. And he
says, you know, look at that cloud there, that
tree. What is, what is real in it? If
you separate out everything about our perception of it,
what would remain over? And this is actually It's
interesting. It shows Nietzsche's roots from the German idealist
tradition, but we can even go to like pure
idealism like Bishop Berkeley, um, who essentially makes the
same argument, like, right, like, uh, every quality that
you assign to an object and say that's an
objective fact about it is something that comes to
you through your senses. So it's, it's sort of
almost like a Zen question to ask, like, what
is, you know, what is this coffee cup. If
I can't see it, touch it, taste the coffee
in it, uh, you know, feel it with my
hand, if all of those senses were denied to
me, what is the thing in itself? What are
we even talking about at that point? What is
the objective reality that we are talking about? And
I think. The issue with like the the philosophy
behind science today, I think Nietzsche would say, It's
not The fact that they're doing physics, it's that
they have an implicit and unarticulated metaphysics behind what
they're doing, that what they're uncovering is this like
objective truth that the key thing is that it's
independent of the human mind and. One of the
things that Klein said, the analytic philosopher, is that
essentially, there's like a an implicit commitment to Plato,
once again, with this notion of like mathematical laws,
or sort of uh physical constants. That we have,
we're now committed to this idea of immaterial things.
That nevertheless endure and persist in all times and
all places, regardless of our perception of them and
that these represent the real like truth of the
world. That's what people say like math is the
language of the universe, something like that. They've cracked
the code, they're seeing the matrix. And I think
What I would say to the scientific realists is
like, We Nietzscheans or or or Nietzsche himself, we're
not attacking the efficacy of science or the the
the worth of science for us. What we're attacking
is this notion that you're decoding the matrix by
doing science because you've never left this world of
pixels and therefore all the mathematical constants that you
find in that world. Might just be errors. You,
you have no idea. Like it's essentially, and it
is the comparison to the Kantian Numenon, I think,
is very apt, uh, so that would be my
position on that.
Yeah, and I mean, I guess that to a
certain extent, I don't know if you would agree
with me on this point or not, and I
guess that, I, I remember at least a few
passages in Nietzsche where he talks about. Um, THE
scientists, the artists, uh, um, the aesthetics, and, and
basically I think if I remember correctly attribute certain
traits that are common to them, and one of
them, uh, or I'm, I'm not sure if I'm
going to talk about the traits, but basically, um,
the idea is that, uh, scientists have sort of
inherited. From, uh, religion, in this particular case, uh,
Judeo-Christian religion, the idea that there's a roof with
a capital T out there to be uncovered and
that, uh, I mean nowadays we no longer have
that sort of perspective, but particularly in the early
days of the Enlightenment, there was this idealistic view
of reason that just threw. uh, JUST by reasoning,
just through pure reason. I mean, I'm not using
the, necessarily the Kantian term here, but just by
using reason and by applying reason itself, you could
arrive at the, the truth. I mean, now, uh
it's not uh it is uh like that, that
science works, of course, we have, uh, empirical studies
and all of that, but I mean, it seems
that it remains in the Epistemology of most scientists,
uh, some, uh, I, I mean, uh, I mean
something that comes originally from religion in the sense
that they tend to approach science as uncovering objective
truth or truth with a capital T and not
a method or um. A collection of methods that
we have at our disposal to construct um the
truth or construct scientific knowledge because scientific knowledge is
a socio-cultural construct. It's not about whatever objective truth
means. I mean, what, what do you think about
that?
Um, THE only thing I would be careful about
would be the sociocultural construct element of it, because
It, I'm not necessarily going to say that that's
not true, but I, I guess I would say
that I think when many people hear that, the
connotation of that is sort of like. You know,
perhaps if we were in a different culture with
different perspectives, OK,
I, I know what we
might come to different truths or something like that,
and I, I think Nietzsche might even go more
fundamentally and say there might even just be errors
that are proper to human perception as such, without
which we cannot reason. And that essentially uh. Yeah,
he does say there's a passage in the gay
science, uh. Where he says it's still a a
metaphysical faith upon which our faith in science rests,
which was also the faith of Plato that God
is truth and truth is divine. I wouldn't take
that as necessarily saying, you know, like the West
has a particular tradition that's been influenced by Plato.
I, I mean, again, I know people can make
these claims, and there is actually something interesting again
to go back to the idea of like the
original Greek view versus the Platonic view because again
in the Cratal list, one of the things that
Socrates says. Is that actually the Greek language emphasizes
movement and becoming, and that's its mistake from Socrates'
point of view, whereas Nietzsche might say that's exactly
what I like about, uh, you know, the Greek
language. And so when I've studied Chinese philosophy, you
do, uh, perhaps have certain hidden assumptions or Just
operating assumptions contained within the language that are that
artifacts of the culture that might affect how you
how you see reality. But ultimately, I think. I
think there is a sort of pre-rational intelligibility, or
sorry, pre-linguistic intelligibility that human beings can come to,
but that doesn't, people often construe that. Into insofar,
right, it's like somebody from China or, or Greece
or presumably even if we could go with the
time machine and go back to Pythagoras, you could
show them the same set of equations and if
they were mathematically sophisticated enough, could communicate that way,
right? That's what people mean when they're saying it's
like the universal language. But I think uh Nietzsche
would say that there there may be elements of
just human cognition. Uh, THAT simply cannot be again
reduced out or, or, or sifted out of our
perception that are going to be shared by all
and people will then extrapolate this. That was the
point I was sort of getting to people extrapolate
this into. You know, it's a very common argument
you'll hear in favor of the objectivity of the
sciences, even if they don't use the truth with
the capital T language anymore, but that there is
a fact of the matter. I can perceive this.
If so and so perceived this, he would come
to the same thing. They would come to the
same conclusion if they ran this experiment, um, you
know, the famous, uh, Ricky Gervais, burn all the
holy books, they would all be different when they
get rewritten, burn all the science books, they'd all
be the same. But, you know, again, that doesn't
ever, I think people really need to understand this,
and it's not a trivial point. That doesn't ever
get you over the chasm to the pneumenon to
to glimpsing the true world. All that tells you
is that all humans perceive the world the same
way. That's all it tells you. And uh Nietzsche,
for his part, see that's the thing is. You
know, I can imagine people saying, so what, there's
no truth? Oh no, that's not Nietzsche's attitude. He
says in the aphorism how the true world finally
became a fable. The true world, this notion of
the true truth beyond human perception. No longer holds
any uh significance to us. It no longer motivates
us, it no longer does anything for us. What
does it do for us to believe in, you
know, This sort of ontology that science is discovering
the true world. What does that actually do? It
does nothing. It has nothing to do with the
actual work of science, which includes continually falsifying and
doubting what you hold to be true. So why
don't we just do that work? That's why Nietzsche
says long live physics. And so he also says,
let's abolish the true world. Doesn't, it's not useful
anymore. What, what's left, the illusory world is no,
we abolished this notion. That appearance is illusory, along
with this notion of the true world. So, we
just accept as the world is the world of
human sensation. And so yeah, if you want to
just say then it's true, fine, but when people
want to fix this like sort of objective notion
to it. They're trying to go beyond human knowledge
and. You know, there is You could see how
that's a, it's a religious or it's a mystical
impulse in a way. So yeah.
Uh, YEAH, you know, I, I guess that if
you're not familiar with it, I guess you would
like the Dutch approach to cognitive science and psychology
because, uh, I, I'm not sure why they have
that in the Netherlands, but for some reason in
their universities, they teach dynamical systems theory instead of
the more mainstream approach. To cognitive science and psychology,
and I've even had uh two interviews on the
show with both authors of a book called Toward
the Process Approaching Psychology, Stepping into Eric Leus's River,
and I mean, just the subtitle tells you a
lot because they basically, uh, they talk about the
difference between the substance ontology and the process on.
Ontology in the specific case of cognitive science and
they uh critique basically uh the limitations of a
substance ontology as we have it in mainstream cognitive
science and psychology in the West particularly, and they
suggest that the process ontology that is instead of
uh a thing instead of what Exists being things.
It's uh I mean there are no things, there
are just uh processes and so, uh, I mean
the, in the book they talk a lot about
that and how um a process ontology via dynamical
systems theory would approach different questions in psychology, for
example, so I, I mean, I guess that's particularly
since they also mentioned Heraclitus, uh, you, you would
be that kind of approach would interest you.
Yeah, no, it, it definitely would, for sure, for
sure. I, I, that's amazing to see Heraclitus, uh,
helping with an understanding of, uh, yeah, and you
said that's been like, that's just sort of. Being
taught in in uh the Netherlands, like,
yeah, I mean, I, I don't know why. I
interviewed a, a Portuguese philosopher, um, a compatriot of
mine, uh, Inezipolito. She also has a, um, dynamical
systems theory approach to, uh, the philosophy of cognitive
science, and she told me it was she who
told me that in the Netherlands. I mean, I
don't, I don't know what's the reason. I don't,
I didn't ask her. I, I should have done
that, but anyway. Uh, BUT she told me that
in the Netherlands, for some reason they teach that
in university instead of the more, uh, traditional or
mainstream approach in cognitive science and psychology, so I,
I don't, I don't know what's the, the cultural
influences there, but anyway,
yeah, I wouldn't have guessed the Dutch, which would
be the, the, the, the bleeding edge of that,
that field, but yeah.
Yeah, OK, so let, let me ask you about
politics. I, I mean, I know that there's that
Hugo Droshon book on Nietzsche's politics. I, I haven't
read it yet, so I'm not sure if he
actually tackles this, this kind of subject there or
not, but What do you think, uh, how do
you think Nietzsche would have reacted to particular, uh,
political movements and ideologies that formed during the 20th
century like, uh, communism, fascism, social democracy, and neoliberal
capitalism. Have, have you thought of that?
Yes, I think that, uh, well, This, this, I'll
give a flippant, glib answer and then I will
explain it. Uh, IT'S all the same thing would
be sort of his initial response. These are all
ideologies that are inconceivable outside of the democratic enlightenment,
the notion of, uh, communism or fascism, they both,
uh, depend on this sort of, uh. Fundamentally this
idea for one of partisan politics, we're going to
form a party. Whether it's the vanguard party of
the proletarian revolution or uh the party, the nationalist
party that's going to safeguard the nation of the
race. Um The same would be true of social
democracy or or or neoliberal capitalism. Now, are there
differences between them? Yes. Uh, ARE there very important
differences from like our moral or political? See, this
is the thing. So oftentimes, uh, the way that
we understand these like historical forms of, uh. Like
political movements that they really refer us back to
the current day and what our political agenda is
now and that's going to affect how we interpret
many of these things that have developed, but essentially,
so what is Nietzsche's project and Nietzsche, you know,
to really get down to to almost like a.
A deep biological, um, like supposition of Nietzsches. WOULD
be his opposition to Darwin. Uh, N Nietzsche obviously
believes in evolution. He believes in a naturalistic, uh,
account of how human beings came to be. But
he says that everywhere I see prevailing the exact
opposite of the state of affairs that Darwin says
would unfold, that the fittest will survive, the strong
will flourish, that uh the strong will then predominate,
and they will, because they're stronger and more adept
at surviving, they will then multiply and become the
dominant species. You have this sort of uh process
of the exception becoming the rule, right? The mutation
changing the genome and, and, uh, you know, creating
a new species. Now, Is that possible? Yes, but
what N Nietzsche says is that's everywhere the exception.
What he sees is the weak predominating. What he
sees is, uh, the, the species has a tendency
to, to proliferate many identical, uh, like individually rather
unimpressive members. We might think of like colonies of
of bees or ants or something like that. They're
basically interchangeable. They're basically just instruments. Of the social
unit or of the the species or organism as
a whole. And whenever a species sort of depends
on rare, powerful, extraordinary individuals for its advancement, if
we can even imagine what that would be, Nietzsche
says that puts them in a precarious and dangerous
position. And he says the same thing is true
with humanity. So this is like a very, like,
it's a very deep claim that Nietzsche's making. It's
not just about like oftentimes people sort of construe
Nietzsche as just being in the category of people
like. You know, McIntyre or Carlyle or or these
like uh stuffy old reactionaries very angry about the
French Revolution. Um, N Nietzsche would say this is
an eternal story, and that one of the great
differences with Darwin is that N Nietzsche stands on
the side of the exception, but he doesn't think
the exception ever becomes the rule. What the rule
is for human beings. Is herdishness, the herd morality.
Now there's Nietzsche obviously has this whole genealogy of
morals where he talks about slave morality, but I
think it's justified to say. That the herd herdishness
or herd morality actually precedes resentiment and slave morality.
It exists before and it exists after it. Christianity
is just like the most particularly like virulent form
of the herd morality. It's the herd's sort of
revenge against life and against the world in a
way. It's a devaluation of the physical world. That's
how Nietzsche views Christianity. That's really what I'm talking
about here for people who haven't read the genealogy.
Uh, AND we can go into that if you
like, but I would say that especially if you
read the gay Science, it becomes very, very clear.
That he thinks it's part of. What we might
say like the power of the social unit, the
organism to instrumentalize and turn all of its individuals
into a function. That Essentially people who violate or
ignore or represent a challenge to the preexisting moral
regime. The norm for them is to be crushed.
There are, there's that Japanese proverb that it's the
tallest blade of grass that is cut. Perfect, perfect
example. People will talk about the, the crabs in
the bucket or something like that. But that's not,
see, Nietzsche would say, OK, but it's not just,
see, the crabs in the bucket, that's like risottomon,
that's just like meaningless, uh, or, or totally unproductive,
um. Hatred of the exception and the extraordinary, right?
Uh, THAT'S the form it eventually begins to take.
But Nietzsche would say, no, there's actually like a
very good and we might say productive reason from
the point of view of the average, the lowest
common denominator, the unremarkable person, the person who follows
the rule. There, it actually suits their advantage to
impose this moral regime and try and um fight
against the people who would represent a rupture to
it. And so that's how he understands, uh, fundamentally
something like democracy and he would see the element
of democracy in fascism as well as in communism.
And that what they attempt to do is that
they propose a sort of ideal. So again, we
have like a fixed idea. It might be a
fixed idea, a fixed moral idea of what the
proper universal destiny of humanity is. It might be
a fixed idea of the nation or of the,
the state itself in the case of say Mussolini
might be a fixed idea of the race. That's
the other interesting thing about Nietzsche is that. He's
totally incompatible with pretty much any like modern day
racial theory because he's anti-essentialist. So people believe there's
an essential notion of what constitutes a race. Uh,
THAT'S the only, you have to start from that
sort of like metaphysics of like human biology, if
you want to get to this notion of preserving
a race, right? And that's why, you know, in
fascism. Uh, THEY had all sorts of occults and
esoteric theories about the origin of, uh, different human
groups that was actually very anti-naturalistic that, you know,
we all came from like different origins and they
were originally like pure, and then they become deluded
and that's what leads to this current state of
degradation. It's actually very interesting. Uh, IT'S not a
racialist theory, but it like, Uh, Evela, the man
for whom the fascists weren't right wing enough. Essentially
believes that uh he he he has this ideology
of traditionalism and it's sort of the same idea.
Like originally there was one tradition that was pure,
that was like the truth, and then all of
like the old religious traditions, they sort of like
break off of it, but they reflect like something
of that tradition and like what you should do
as a modern person is like, Even though you
might not be able to square the circle of
all the superstitions and contradictions, you should just follow
your tradition because it is a pathway to truth.
You shouldn't try to syncretize and mix them all
together, right? It's actually like the commitment and the
purity to this idea that will lead you to
the truth. So N Nietzsche's totally against all that,
but he sees this activity as like what the
herd does. And this ties into the overman versus
the last man idea. He says explicitly in his
notes for thus book Zarathustra that he sees two
movements that are possible. One is his movement, the
movement towards the overman. The other is the last
man movement, and he says he uses the phrase,
uh, in the translation, I have great ant organizations
of humankind. Essentially that it's proceeding in that like
you social direction. Everyone becomes an instrument, everyone becomes
a function of the herd. And one of the
things he, he says that the language he often
uses in Zarathustra, they want a herd but no
shepherd. So, and that's one of the things he
says about uh capitalism in the modern economy. It's
turning everyone into a slave, into a cog of
the machine. Yeah, but with no master, with no
visionary or artist of like how to use it,
what is it all for? Where is it all
going? No one really has a, uh, we don't
have a unified theory of where human society or
civilization is going other than just to. Reproduce the
types that we already are, to help preserve us
so that we continue to eat, and, uh, can
I curse on your show?
Uh, I, I guess it depends on the world.
I mean, we have to be careful. We have
to be careful with YouTube. I, I think you're
aware of that. Yeah,
so, so people just want to eat and shag
and continue to, uh, produce their type as it
already is. That's the last man, the final form,
the last man. I have already arrived at the
form that I need to be, uh, and so
that's why Nietzsche presents this whole idea. I, I
think Zarathustra is part of this idea of getting
us to think in terms of becoming rather than
being. So we're not like mankind isn't is a
process, it's not a thing. It's a bridge. So
even that is using the language of a thing,
but he's, he's, it's provisional language to try and
make a point, a bridge between ape and Superman
that essentially we are not, uh, What's great about
man is what we can give rise to is
the potential that exists within us, uh, but what
every morality hitherto has tried to do is say,
how do we preserve and recapitulate to the type
just as we are and so that may seem
like kind of a cop out, but I would
say that essentially. Nietzsche ends up being against basically
all of these modern movements in politics and it's
very hard and then people say, well, what is
Nietzsche's politics because you can't just be against everything.
The problem is that Nietzsche's politics can't be represented
in a democratic form. You, you can't ever have
a party of Nietzscheans. The exception can't ever become
the rule. That's one of his central points. Like
we're, we're not, he's like, you know, oh, Nietzsche
likes Napoleon, he likes, uh, Goethe. Well, you're not
going to create a society that produces all Goethe's.
That also that society wouldn't function, by the way,
so there's
that, uh, you know, you know, it's, it's funny,
it's funny because uh when I finished reading Zarathustra,
the first idea that came to my mind is
that what I should do with that book was
to burn it. I mean, I, I, I thought
that the message Nietzsche was sending me. WAS burn
the book and do with your life, uh, decide
for yourself what you want to do with your
life, which actually also, I mean, I've told that
to two or three people who uh are very
much into Nietzsche and they didn't like that idea
of burning the book. I mean, what, what do
you, how do you react to that?
Oh, I think it's great. I mean, he, he
says lose me, and then you can find me
again. And I think Yeah, so this is sort
of the eternal problem with N Nietzsche, and it's
why he's destined to be misunderstood, and he's OK
with that. He says, I would rather be a
buffoon than a saint, and that perhaps that is
my fate. And he even anticipates it in Zarathustra.
There's Zarathustra's ape who is misrepresenting his teachings and
uh claiming to preach the true way of Zarathustra.
Um, SO he's aware of all this, and the
fact of the matter is, Many people will read
N Nietzsche's works and what they want out of
it is self-help, or they want a series of
prescriptions. OK, what am I supposed to do? And
so for on the one hand, it's, it's so
funny when people ask me about Nietzsche's like political
opinions, which he does have, by the way, it's
not like he doesn't have them. But they're just
that, his opinions, and I'm not exactly sure why.
Just strictly because Nietzsche said something that should motivate
you to like adopt a political program, that doesn't
really follow, like what are his arguments for these
things, and it's worth noting. N Nietzsche never produces
a work of political philosophy or political theory. If
so if he really did want to clearly articulate
some sort of political program. He certainly would have
done so. He, he had, he wrote plenty of
books, but it's like people have to sort of
like tease it out, sift it out of like
all these different works. They look through his descriptive
statements about politics. They look at historical regimes that
he praised or historical figures that he praised, which
by the way, already there we're in difficulty, right,
because Nietzsche praises the Greek state. One of the
most consistent things about Nietzsche is admiration for the
ancient Greeks, as from the beginning of his career
to the end, there are some changes in his
attitude, but overall the admiration is rather consistent. Well,
who are the political figures he praises? Napoleon and
Friedrich the Second Hohenstaufen and Cesare Borgia. Well, right
there, that's a total contradiction because the Greeks, as
Nietzsche says, abominated autocracy. They didn't want one person
to rule. He says the whole reason for the
Agon, or, or sorry, for the, the practice of
ostracism, the social practice, very strange social practice in
Athens where every year they vote on who's to
be banished, which I think we should bring that
back, but he essentially says that. You know, people
interpreted that as like a safety valve to get
dangerous people out of the society, says it only
became that later. Really what it is, is that
the whole society is based on competition and contest
between one another, and it's boring when the same
person wins over and over again. So they have
to keep the competition going. You don't want Magnus
Carlsson to win the world championship every year. You
want him to step away so that then when
Ding Li Ren and Jan Nepomnici are playing, hey,
it's anyone's game. It's actually exciting once again now
that Magnus was not there for that year, whatever
year it was. And Nietzsche says essentially that's the
the impetus for ostracism. Now, is that true? Is
that actually historically supported? I think that's very sketchy,
but that's how Nietzsche sees things. So he basically,
and, and all the Greek, I mean what is
certainly true is that the Greek states were either
democratic or oligarchic. They, they, and when there was
autocracy, they called it tyranny. That's where we get
the word, and, uh, the commentaries of Greeks on
that state of affairs is all as a degeneration.
So then right there, like, Nietzsche's praising the Greek
state, but also uh Napoleon. The most famous autocrat,
almost a totally non-political actor in a way, the
most like, not like, uh, there's no sort of
like, uh, what would we say like ideological political
motive behind his seizure of power. Again, at least
not from Nietzsche's perspective. He says he does it
for himself, he crowns himself, um, Cesari Borgia doesn't
even succeed. He gets killed unceremoniously and brutally, um,
you know, so. Uh, THIS is all, I guess,
circling around like your question of like burning Zarathustra,
like, here is my way, where is yours? The
way, it does not exist, this perfect way. Um,
We can see Nietzsche's attitude by reference to politics.
I, I think that um. Nietzsche is far, far
more interested, for one, in posing questions than giving
you an answer, and he's far, far more interested
in kindling your desire, your inquisitive desire, your curiosity.
He says this in Eke homo, so sort of
like. He, he, he really sees, uh, learning and
teaching. Teaching is like a great gift. He says
it's, it's a, it's. He experiences it as like
an overflowing in a generosity, uh, to give to
people. I, I guess that's, you know, not really
a direct refutation of the idea that he wants
to give people a morality, but I just, I
guess I would say my sense for Nietzsche is
that it's just totally that's not what he's interested
in. And furthermore, if, if he was interested in
that, his better sense, his better judgment tells him
it would all be pointless because your ideas aren't
going to be. Faithfully reproduced when they're put into
a democratic form, uh, there's a great line in
Human All Too Human where he says. Uh, ALL
political parties today. Are tasked with making their ideas
appealing to the greatest number which requires them to
paint their principles onto the wall in giant frescoes
of stupidity. That's essentially what happened. It doesn't even
have to be political, right? Like if, if everyone
starts taking and adopting Nietzsche's ideas and trying to,
I'm gonna use Nietzsche to improve my life and
become a better person, it's inevitable that 99% of
that is going to be utter nonsense or it's
going to just be a reflection of what the
person already believes, sort of laundered through Nietzsche's work,
or it's going to be just something that refers
back to their own pathological, psychological gunk, or, you
know, maybe some people will get some good self-help,
you know. Notes from Nietzsche, but that's nothing that
he, that's not his goal. Yeah,
another thing that I find funny just before we
move on to another topic is the fact that
er you get lots of people nowadays and you
even see that on social media, uh Twitter, X
or and and other places. Is that there are
many people who identify as, for example, ethno-nationalists or
white supremacists or um I mean some something like
that or uh uh uh uh a version of
A far right, uh, authoritarianism. So, um, and they
quote Nietzsche, uh, frequently, and I mean, I, I
never understood really well why they do that because
I, I mean even uh just me myself going
through uh reading of Nietzsche's work and I only
did it once. Uh, I never got the sense
that he would support those kinds of ideas and
even sometimes people, particularly some political leaders presenting themselves
in the 20th century and perhaps even some of
them nowadays if you ask them, and if they
have actually read Nietzsche, maybe they, they would say
the same or would answer along the same lines.
I, I mean some of them actually thinking of
themselves as Ubermensch. I mean, uh, was Hitler really
a Ubermensch? I mean, is any of our, uh,
is any, uh, are any of our politic current
political leaders people that Nietzsche would admire and would
label, uh, um, or you would use a label
such as Ubermensch, uh, to attach to them.
Well, I mean, in Zarathustra, he says, never has
there yet been an overman. So if, if Napoleon
wasn't an overman or Ubermensch and Goethe wasn't, and
Friedrich the Second wasn't and Alexander the Great wasn't,
are we really gonna apply that label to like
Donald Trump or Joe Biden, like our current political,
you know, like it, it's just, it's, it's so
farcical and absurd on the face of it, but
I would say I, I don't, I'm not terribly
puzzled over why there are like hard right Nietzscheans.
I think, uh, there are a couple of things
going on. For one, Uh, Nietzsche does have a
value set that he's trying to promote. That is
explicitly anti-democratic and anti-egalitarian. Now it's also, as we've
mentioned, non-essentialist, anti-moralist, it has all these other suite
of, of, of, uh, aspects to it that actually
if they were. Thoroughly reckoned with would would uh
deconstruct this hard right Nietzscheanism, uh, as well. But
uh like uh while you were talking, I pulled
up a quote that I think will help people
understand. This is from Mussolini. He doesn't specifically mention
N Nietzsche, but he says, quote, If relativism signifies
contempt for fixed categories and those who claim to
be the bearers of objective immortal truth, then there
is nothing more relativistic than fascist attitudes and activity.
From the fact that all ideologies are of equal
value, we fascists conclude that we have the right
to create our own ideology and to enforce it
with all the energy of which we are capable.
So that's Mussolini. So There is a certain interpretate
like, there's an interpretation you can take from Nietzsche
of like, OK, it's all just relative, it's all
perspective, so it's all just like. What suits my
advantage or like what I want, my morality can
just be what I want, my aesthetic demand for
the world. Well, this is what I want, right?
And so it's not Nietzschean per se, right? So,
so that's the thing. Nietzsche is describing that that's
what people do when they create their moral ideas
behind all of logic and its seeming sovereignty of
movement. There's these pre-rational demands for a physiological demand
for the preservation of a certain way of life.
But again, notice he uses the term preservation. So
that's why. That's why he says he, he actually
makes it explicit in Twilight of Idols. All of
you who are trying to like preserve an old
order, or like that never works. Anyone who wants
to fight decadence, so much of the right wing
now, they want to fight decadence, moral decay. He
says you're essentially, that's like fighting the symptom and
not dealing with the problem, cause you can't. So
you're like, somebody has a a fever, so you're
like giving them ice cream, something like that. I
don't, I don't like, this is like a ridiculous
thing. Uh, HE also makes it explicit. There's a
great passage, N Nietzsche's 5 nos. He says, my
5 no's, 5 things I reject. He explicitly says,
I reject Rousseauian romanticism of like man's basically good,
Garden of Eden, hold hands and sing with the
animals. Uh, THAT'S nonsense, but he also says, I
reject. Uh, THE romanticism in the sense of Wagner
and this like hard right militarism that wants to
return to, he basically says they want to, they've
constructed a representation on an idea. Of eras they
never lived in and they're looking back to that
they wanna go back to that because they're in
a state of distress in the modern world and
they can't deal with it and they're looking, they
don't have any vision for the future, so they're
latching on to something from the past but what
I would say also is that. There has been
a strain of left Nietzscheans. And I mean their
activity is is is described equally in these terms
like they are just following the prejudices of their
own sentiments. They are just following what their own
relativistic view of, OK, well this is what we
want and I've brought this up before, but even
in the Soviet Union, there was the idea of
the new Soviet man, which is has a covert
influence from Nietzsche. This idea that we're literally going
to change people into new kinds of human beings,
but it's going to accord with, uh, you know,
our vision, our values of like this egalitarian post-capitalist
society. Um, I would say both are ultimately falsifications
of Nietzsche, I guess, but You know, that gets
into whether or not there's like a true interpretation
or orthodox interpretation. What's become very clear to me
from surveying all the interpretations of Nietzsche is that
from the very beginning, right, from like, even when
he was still alive, Lusalome writes the first biography
and survey of Nietzsche's work, and then like really
shortly after his death, you have like York Brandes,
you have HL Mencken, you have Bertrand Russell. All
interpreting Nietzsche in very different ways and coming to
very different judgments of whether he's on the left
or the right, and basically people have concluded throughout
the last century that Nietzsche is either left wing
or right wing, and that's good actually or that's
bad actually, or that Nietzsche is a does have
a political project or he doesn't, or he's an
existential thinker or he's a more psychological thinker. You
can basically, in a way, N Nietzsche's works are
like the Bible. You can pull out anything from
them if you want to. Um, I guess that
doesn't really bode well for me claiming to give
like a helpful interpretation of Nietzsche, but I think
the best way to proceed is by Nietzsche's own,
uh, rule of thumb where he says the worst
readers behave like plundering troops. They come in with
an idea of what they want to like take
or appropriate from the work, and then they despoil
the whole and lay lay waste to it, right?
That essentially that's what it is to be a
bad reader, I think. The only thing I can
say to anyone who's getting these political interpretations out
of Nietzsche, which I think all of them are
largely unjustified. Is like, no, take a step back,
go back to the texts, read more, read everything
Nietzsche wrote, don't just repost a quote that sounds
good and validates your idea. Really try to understand.
Nietzsche the person. Um, AND this is the joy
I think is going way beyond your question. That's
the whole joy for me of philosophy. It's one
of my favorite passages and probably the favorite episode
of my own podcast that I've done is the
one on the journey to Hades, where Nietzsche talks
about 8 figures. He says, there's 4 pairs of
eyes that have fixed themselves on me when I've
journeyed to the underworld. And these are figures who
are in many ways opposed to one another or
have incommensurate viewpoints, but Nietzsche says, I will give
them the right of judgment over me and in
regard to one another. I, I will accept judgment
alone from them, and he's talking about figures like
Montagna and Plato and uh Rousseau and Schopenhauer and
Epicurus and figures that oftentimes in his published work,
Nietzsche is criticizing. But what they are is they
represent a certain view of life, a certain way
of living and way of being. That Communing with
is like incredibly valuable to him. It's like a
great joy. And so I would say many of
these like shallow political readings. What's motivating it psychologically
is very obvious. They're using each other. They already
have concluded what they want. They already have a
certain vibe or aesthetic or like moral regime or
program that they want to enact. And they see
some things from Nietzsche, so that can be very
useful. They're being parasitical on Nietzsche, but that's not,
I would rather have a conversation with Nietzsche, to
whatever extent that's possible.
Yeah, I, I mean, maybe someone in the future
will create a nicheche chatbot based on
the books. Don't, don't depress me, brother.
OK, so, uh, let me ask you now, I
mean, I've been, I've been, I've been thinking about
this for a while and I mean, maybe I'm
mixing here uh ideas that shouldn't be mixed when
it comes to Nietzsche's philosophy and if I'm doing
that, please correct me, but I, I was uh
thinking about what it means to be of. Authentic
according to Nietzsche and then I also thought, OK,
so let's imagine that someone has the psychological predispositions
or impulses to that lead them to embrace slave
morality and that is something that Nietzsche, I think
it's fair to say, despised, so. Would such a
person be authentic with those kinds of psychological predispositions
and if they decided to embrace slave morality? Uh,
WHAT are your thoughts on, on that kind of,
I mean, uh, uh, on those kinds of thoughts
that I've read on this topic? Yeah,
I The first thing I would say is that
uh. Authenticity is not usually the language that Nietzsche
uses. I know what you're, you're asking, but it's,
uh. I think if there's an indeterminate definition here,
it could be, it could lead to some complications.
I would say certainly like Sart, who's very much
influenced by Nietzsche, authenticity is like very much his
central concern and to the extent that We could
see something like authenticity in Nietzsche. Perhaps it would
be something like a unity of words and deeds
or of feeling and action. So, you know, there
is this uh This, so, so the answer to
your question is yes and no as regards slave
morality, right? The yes answer, they could be authentic,
would be something like this, um, Nietzsche's not leveling
a moral condemnation against slave morality. That is just
the reality of what has transpired historically, and in
fact, he says in all higher and complex societies,
uh, the individuals have both master and slave morality
even contained within the same soul. They're mutually unintelligible
to one another and irreconcilable. There's no uh fictian
synthesis that's going to be affected between them. There's
no Hegelian sublation. It's just eternal war between master
and slave morality, and yet we contain both, and
uh I believe he says like human life would
be, uh, rather like I'm trying to remember the
term he uses my terms like fatuous like it
would, it would just, it wouldn't be as interesting
without the challenge from the slave morality to the
master morality. Right, uh, and that there are aspects
of the slave morality, for example, the fact that
it makes us conscious, self-conscious in a more profound
way than we were before, because it introduces these
ideas of guilt and sin and responsibility and, uh,
like Nietzsche says, for example, in the gay science,
that, uh, Our self-knowledge today is so much more
profound than when we read like Epictetus or like
the ancients. We would actually laugh at them. They
actually think it's possible to be a virtuous person
when you read the ancient stoics and the later
Stoics, they think, uh, you can actually be a
good guy, whereas the Christians now we know because
we've, it's essentially like what Christianity gave us is
like that. Magnifying glass to really peer into the
soul and be like you think you're a good
person, but actually deep down you know that there's
selfishness that drove that apparently selfless action. Which is
kind of funny because that's the basis on which
Nietzsche challenges morality himself. He says it was the
moral skepticism created by Christianity that will actually undermine
Christianity itself, but anyway, that takes us off into
the weeds. So Christianity gave us something. It made
us more self-conscious, and, and that has a lot
of bad effects because consciousness is prone to pathologies
and mistakes. Essentially what resentiment is, he says, is
the inability to let go of a sensation. So
you're harmed by someone, someone beats you up. And
you're holding on to the memory of the pain,
the humiliation of that event, and that sensation, that
feeling stays with you long after the event has
passed, so you're unable to let go of it,
essentially. And so this is like a. We can
see it through the language of a pathology, and
we don't need to sort of moralize it and
make a prescriptive statement, you shouldn't be a slave
moralist, you shouldn't have resentment. Because that clearly is
not the way to dealing with really any psychological
problem. I mean you've you you've spoken quite a
bit about. Modern sciences vindicating Nietzsche or showing that
Nietzsche prefigured his real sort of knowledge. I was
speaking to, uh, Jimmy Burke on my podcast who
does research into evidence-based behavior change and cognitive behavioral
therapy, and he said essentially the field is catching
up to where Nietzsche was, that it's no longer
this question of like willpower because that's like. What
is that exactly? What, what is the story we're
telling when we say he just didn't have enough
willpower? You know, Nietzsche has some very funny comments
about the will where he says, now we know
the will is only a word, and it's a
word behind which a popular prejudice lurks. And so
this idea that you just need the will to
quit smoking or to lose weight or do any
of these things. Is essentially just part of an
old moral regime that's like a falsification of the
world and that in fact, modern behavior change is
based far more on putting people in a better
environment, trying to create sort of automatic or spontaneous,
uh, like. Actions, re-triggering thing or decode or what
would you say, diffusing those old triggers, replacing them
with new ones that might push you in a
more positive direction or something like that. And so,
yeah, I, I would say. The whole moralization of,
you know, slave morality result in all these things,
that wouldn't be helpful, and I don't think that
would be Nietzsche's approach. It might be unsatisfying to
hear, but his attitude is something to the effect
of it is what it is. Again, this is
the eternal story of the herd sort of smashing
down the the exception. Like you had these aristocracies
of master morality, and they generated so much resentiment
that the herd overthrew them. The issue then is
that we're still holding on to the resentment. It's,
he says the real problem is when it turned
inward and became creative and starts giving birth to
values, and that's the real issue. Now, so could
somebody hold those values and be authentic? Well, If
those values suit who and what they are, I
mean, it's one of the things Deluz says about
Nietzsche. We always, things always have the sense and
value that they have for us based on who
and what we are. We always have the sense
and value for things that we deserve, it's the
way he puts it, something along those lines. Now,
I did say it was yes and no, right?
The question of authenticity. There is a technical sense
in which they're not authentic because. It's the very
intercession of the neutral substrate of the ego, that's
autonomously governing force with free will. That Nietzsche would
say creates this experience of not living authentically. That
there's now a separation between what I want to
do, what I feel. And what I can do
In fact, that's what how Deluz defines reactive forces.
He says they don't triumph, uh, so we might
say reactive forces, uh, we'll just say sort of
uh. Slave morality, weakness, herd morality, something like that.
They don't triumph by comprising a greater force, they
triumph by separating the greater force from what it
can do. And so, uh, we now mediate our
Like impulses through this whole moral regime of guilt
and sin, not so much sin these days, but
nevertheless, Nietzsche would say we, we have this whole
grammatical construction, right? Uh, THIS ties back into like
substance ontology, talks about separating the lightning from the
flash, saying the lightning flashes, or you could say
the flash flashes. What are you, what are you
actually saying there? You're, you're trying to freeze this
deed and make it into a thing. Nietzsche says
in in nature. It's the norm for every impulse
to be gratified immediately, to express itself immediately. There's
also a great passage that that long precedes the
genealogy where he talks about this, again, talking about
the social sort of process of inculcating these values.
He uses the example of an unchaste woman, a
woman who wants to cheat on her husband and
perhaps of an ancient Bronze Age society where they
might have the death penalty for adultery or something
like this, and he says, why, how could you
ever develop the kind of animal that would not
commit adultery, if we are indeed just animals, we're
clever animals that invented knowledge, how did we create
these people who would be able to not gratify
the impulse? And he says, what's required here is
for a feeling to be suppressed by a thought.
Well, how could that be the case because we've
already talked about sort of thought is always appropriated
by feeling. Well, because he says it's the thought
of fear. Essentially what happens is the community by
punishing people over long generations, doing public executions, he
says, and he does talk about this in the
genealogy, he talks about how much blood has been
spilled essentially to give man a memory, essentially to
make us capable of making promises so that we
will hold that image in mind when we transgress
or we're thinking of transgressing. And then experience that
fear, and that will halt. The pursuit of that
impulse, essentially something like this. And so I think
when many people describe the feeling of being inauthentic,
it's because they have a thoroughly developed sense of
this neutral substratum of the self that halts and
intercedes, uh. Between what they really want, what they
really feel like they want to do, right? They
really, they really feel about the world, what they
really want to say, what they really want, the
life path they really want to pursue, and they
don't because they have this, uh, this wall that
they've put up, and Nietzsche would say. That might
be the very definition of living inauthentically, is that
you're allowing guilt, fear, shame, sin, whatever it might
be. To stop you from living your authentic life.
But even see, I, I just slipped up there.
I used the word allowing, because Nietzsche would say,
it's not a question of free will, it's simply
which force is stronger than the other one. If
if you have, like, most people don't have, uh,
strong enough impulses to overcome that sense of the
community's fear, and that's largely, by the way, I
think what guilt is. Um, PEOPLE, you know, like
people might get away with something, a crime, or,
uh, you know, cheating on their girlfriend or whatever
it might be. And, you know, there's the fear
of getting caught, but When that doesn't manifest, it's
almost like as a compensation for that, the guilt
is like, it's like the ability of that fear
to continue punishing you or something like that. Um,
IT'S it's the community's power, the voice of your
conscience is the community's voice whispering in your ear
about what you should or shouldn't do. Again, according
to this logic of what benefits the community, what
would make you a good instrument or function of
the community, so it'd be really bad if you're
Committing crimes, if everyone is committing crimes and, and
being, you know, living in infidelity and all of
these things, at least in especially in early social
formations, we don't have the same sexual morality now,
but obviously, but. Yeah, so I think that that
gets the point across. So I would say yes
and no. It's like, it's not as if he
would say they should live some other way because
it's immoral to be resentful. That's just sort of
is what it is, and that's what the herd
is going to do. And that's, uh, he does
hope that we can overcome that, but you're not
going to overcome it by scolding it and shaking
your finger at it. But on the other hand,
it is inauthentic. It's almost a definition of what
people feel. Like what they're trying to articulate when
they say they're living in authentically.
OK, so, um, this might be, uh, I, I
mean, actually all of the questions here are, are
complicated, but this one partic might be particularly complicated,
but of course, as we've already talked about, Nietzsche
was very much a moral anti-realist, but of course
he was also uh a per a human like
all of us are, and I mean, he certainly
must have had this. Uh, MORAL preferences, but do
you think that Nietzsche, at the end of the
day, or there's any, uh, is there anything in
his work. Where you think that possibly he might
have endorsed a set of moral values.
Uh, YEAH, the short answer is yes. I mean,
I think so to sort of refer back to
the very first question you asked me, right? Uh,
Nietzsche doesn't reject reason, but he reinterprets what reason
is. So Nietzsche reinterprets the nature of morality, but
that doesn't, uh, I don't think That he thinks
we can live without it in a way, it's
sort of like. You know, Nietzsche can spend all
this time criticizing morality, but there's still evaluative judgments
that he's making, as he says, even at the
very level of my perceptions of the world and
that we're all going to have certain. Uh, PRE-RATIONAL
assessments of what is better and what is worse.
That's essentially like. In a in a way, like
the function of thinking is to, to rank order
things and to, uh, that's what valuing is, is
rank ordering in a way. And, uh, that's also
a lot of the problem that he has with
the last man is trying to the and the
leveling when he speaks about these things is that
it, it sort of, uh, deconstructs the order of
rank and makes it impossible, and so it makes
thinking impossible because valuing is part of thinking. So
yeah, like if valuing is part of thinking, then
then certainly Nietzsche has some moral ideas. But again,
he reinterprets it. So, so this is what I
would say about Nietzsche's moral ideas. The most important
thing is that he is not a universalist. Uh,
THERE'S the great passage in the gay science where
he says, you know, so he's spoken of in
the death of God, he talks about God as
a sun to which the earth is anchored. What
what gave us the right to unchain the earth
from its sun. So it's sort of like this
like metaphysical grounding around which the earth orbits, sort
of holding us in place. Now, some have interpreted
this as a lament, oh no, woe is me.
But N Nietzsche says, no, my, uh, it's actually
a great opportunity. It's a cause for hope. I
hope that many new suns are yet to be
discovered. He says, the earth has its antipodes just
as the moral earth does. There's a lot of
metaphors and the Science, by the way, about like
Columbus, if not specifically Columbus, because he was in
Genoa when he was writing it. So he's on
his mind, he's constantly using seafaring metaphors and the
idea of sailing to a new world, discovering some
new world on the opposite side of the world
that we currently live in. So the idea that
there could be like, to speak metaphorically, there's a
star that shines for you on one side of
the world some way, he says that explicitly of
justifying your way of life. He says one thing
is needful to to be able to justify and
celebrate the kind of being that you are. So
you could have your stars shining for you, and
on the other side of the the globe, there's
someone who has another star shining for him that
might even be antipodal, the completely opposite. Yet he
says, I hope we discover all sorts of new
ways of justifying life. So he fundamentally he says,
my new free spirits, the philosophers of the future
that I hope for, they'll love their truths, but
they will not be dogmatists. Dogmatism, it's been the
source of like the greatest errors, so universalist philosophy,
eternal fixed truths. N Nietzsche just simply isn't operating
within that realm of, of thinking. So that's not
what his the form that his morality takes. That
being said, does he have moral ideas? Yes, and
I think the one word that we could use
to describe it would be Dionysian. He essentially, if
he has like a moral project, it is to
reintroduce the Dionysian into the world. What does that
mean? Well, he thinks that Dionysus is. Well, symbolically
and historically, Dionysus is a god of life. He's
a god of in a way of eternal life,
but not eternal life in the Christian sense that
you go and live in this fixed form in
a uh a, you know, superordinate realm. Dionysus continually
dies and is reborn. He, he appears in many
different forms. In the Greek tragedies, originally it was
a sort of religious ritual. It comes from the
Dionysian Dioram, and these inspired spontaneous poet, poets who
were under the influence of wine and drunkenness. WOULD
sing the praises of Dionysus. Eventually they had an
actor who would represent Dionysus wearing a mask. And
then eventually the Greek tragedies are are created, which
are stories from the Greek myths and uh histories,
and A heroic tragic figure replaces Dionysus. So, it's
interesting, it's almost like Dionysus is appearing in a
new form, because the fate of these figures is
always, just as Dionysus is torn apart by the
titans, only to be reborn, there's always a new
tragic hero, Oedipus, or, uh, we might say Agamemnon,
who, whose fate is to be rent asunder. And
that's not because he's, it's a morality play, Nietzsche
insists on this. He says the nobleman does not
sin, is the message of the Greek tragedy. Uh,
THAT'S not any fault of his own. It's just
the way things go in life, that the life
is this endless rhythmic cycle of creation and destruction,
and that there is a sort of a necessary
prerequisite of destruction in order to be creative. That's
sort of his vision of life. And what Nietzsche
thinks happened is that Essentially with the slave morality
and A number of other social historical developments, we've
suppressed the Dionysian and tried to forget about it.
Um, NOW, to the extent that we are alive,
I guess the Dionysian still lives within us. But
he would say we, we express it in very
perverse and uh. Deranged ways nowadays in Christianity. There's
a great line where he says, Christianity gave Eros
poison to drink. He did not die, but degenerated
into a vice. So one of the ways of
looking at that would be. Nietzsche talks a lot
about the Dionysian as involving this element of the
orgiastic. He says the Greeks allowed for certain days,
places, and times for their all too human. So
the most problematic drives and impulses that are nevertheless
part of life and sometimes in, in a way
the best stuff of life, right? Like when we're
competing in sports or, or I mentioned chess earlier,
there's like a real bloodthirstiness, especially in chess, and
a real joy in destroying your opponent, right? And
uh of course sexuality and lust is a very,
uh, You know, they talk about in French, the
little death. It's like an ego death experience almost
can like slake off all of your conscious moral,
uh, self-conscious bullshit and just, you know, uh, enjoy
this, this, uh, experience. And so Nietzsche basically says
in so many words, this is inhuman, all too
human. They would have a certain day and time,
a ritual where these, these could be given free
reign. We'd have an orgiastic ritual. And as a
result, what he says is the impulse is sharpened.
And glorified, it's exalted, but it's also contained. The
Christianity. So, so another way to look at this,
there was a book, and I forget the author,
I forget her name, unfortunately. But I think it
was the subtitle was from Fasting or from feasting
to Fasting, as showing like the European mindset changes
with the advent of Christianity, overcoming the pagan world.
Um, OBVIOUSLY you still do some feasting these days,
but You know, we can see it's very, I
think, evocative and intuitive to understand that like. The
Dionysian, the Greek world, let the impulses, let the
drives have a feast. And They didn't like allow
for, it wasn't like they thought it was OK
to just be publicly drunk all the time or
to express your sexual impulse all the time. They
would have had just as dim a view of
a person like that as we would, probably actually
even more, uh, like, uh, would be opposed to
that kind of thing.
Oh, by the way, I think is the book
From Feasting to Fasting The Evolution of a Sin
by Veronica Grimm?
Yes, is that, yes.
Oh, OK,
OK. Um, THANK you, thank you, yes, so it,
it essentially. What this does is this allows us
to Give the impulse event in a very specific
context, and then at the end of that, you
don't feel as though you're ashamed or guilty. They
have this conception of like. You know, uh, Eros
again, the god took hold of me. Right, this
was a divine thing. So anything that like transcends
the human will. The human will is powerless against
can be conceived of as a god, some sort
of external force, and so that's how they conceive
of it. They can sort of honor the most,
like we might even say the dirtiest or most
vicious impulses of life. Now we only say they're
dirty or vicious because that's what Christianity has done
to them, because Christianity. It creates this totally different
regulative regime. That basically says, uh, it uses we've
already talked about this. It basically establishes this guilt
responsibility regime. And so Nietzsche says like, The whole
inner life of the Greek versus the Christian, it's
totally mutually unintelligible because the Greek had this sort
of uh What would we say? Like he didn't
have this inner dance of pride and shame that's
like sort of the defining like emotional landscape, uh,
as regards morality that we have, um, and so.
To bring it back full circle of like what's
Nietzsche's moral project. Dionysus is. Like, fundamentally, so he
describes it by many terms. He calls it excess,
he calls it the orgiastic. He also says uh
he invokes the idea of Dionysus as a god
of life. But fundamentally, it's the idea of life
affirmation. And that's not like a placid, like sort
of just, oh, life is good, smooth over all
the tragedy and suffering of life. It's the idea
that in full confrontation of that tragedy and suffering.
To say that life is a fundamentally innocent state
of affairs. That it guilt is something we made
up. That we created that had a very powerful
use, very, um, you know, uh, there's there's not,
it's not trivial. It's not like, oh, we should
just get rid of that. Like, it might be
possible we're incapable of getting rid of it at
this point or that it would in fact bring
ruin to society if we got rid of it.
But that's why Nietzsche. Says the fundamental. Uh, Question
or opposition within his philosophy as Dionysus versus the
crucified. And That essentially, I think one way to
put it would be like this. Everyone, basically, in
Nietzsche's view, has been an advocate for the crucified
ever since the time of Christianity. We've all been
advocates for morality and for this platonic view of
truth and for duties and for reproducing the morality
of the common person. Nietzsche thinks it would be
a nice counterbalance to be the one person who
unequivocally comes and stands up and says, I'm for
Dionysus. I'm for the view that life is innocent.
That it's good, you should honor your impulses and
indulge upon them, on them, you know, you should,
we can have this tragic view of life and
nevertheless say we love life. I think that is,
uh, Nietzsche's moral orientation, but again, it's not universalist
because he doesn't think most people. We'll be able
to uh on board the Dionysian, if that makes
sense. That it it will remain uh the kind
of thing that can be appreciated by a few
extraordinary exceptions. Um, BUT yeah, I think that's would
be his position.
Yeah, I mean, there are a, a few philosophers
out there uh trying to basically build a case
for abolishing morality and for amoralism. For example, earlier
this year, I interviewed Steven Morris, he has a
very interesting book, Moral Damages, The Case for Abolishing
Morality, and I also interviewed Other philosophers like Joel
Marx is a,
is also a moral case for abolishing morality. You
have to be, right?
I, I mean, I guess, yeah, I mean, I,
I actually don't buy too much into the possibility
of us becoming amoral. I mean, I don't buy
too much into that. I, I, I appreciate, uh,
their, the arguments made by Steven Morris and Joe.
Marx and others, but, uh, I don't buy too
much into them. I, I, in, in terms of
us being, for example, moral anti-realists in the sense
that perhaps we can be, uh, relativists, annihilists, I
mean, probably not so much, but I, I, I
think that. There's some evidence that people can be
uh morally uh rela rela uh they can be
relativists in terms of their Uh, morality, but, anyway,
that, that's just, uh, a comment that I wanted
to make also to, to refer to the book
by Steven Morris if anyone is interested in reading
it. But, uh, I mean, we've already done almost
2 hours here, so let let me perhaps just,
uh, bring on, uh, a last topic. So, uh,
Of course, this is something that Nietzsche did or
tried to do with uh several philosophers and thinkers,
that is he psychologized them in the sense of
he tried to understand and speculate about which aspects
of their psyche. Ecology led to their ideas, right?
So do you think that we can do the
same with Nietzsche and if so, uh, what ideas
or what aspects of his psychology do you think
could have led to. Particular ideas that he had.
I mean, I'm going just to give you one
example of one thing that I thought of, um,
so when it comes to the idea of a
more fatty, uh, in the particular case of Nietzsche,
uh, I think that there would be a reasonable
case to be made that. Uh, POSSIBLY one of
the reasons why he was into the idea of
a morhati of loving your destiny. Is that, uh,
basically in many ways, but particularly when it comes
to his health, uh, he had a very complicated,
uh, life. I mean, I'm, I'm not sure if
I would call it miserable, but uh at the
very least a very complicated life. I mean, the,
uh, the migraine. That he experienced and all of
that, and I think, please correct me if I'm
wrong, but I think that even now we're not
completely sure about what kind of uh health condition
he could have had. So, uh, but I mean,
the point I was going to make is that
I guess that uh through his own experiences, it
would make sense that he would endorse an idea
like a more fatty. Because basically, at least back
then, there probably wasn't any cure or treatment for
his condition and so he had to live with
it. And so maybe you could say that I'm
making a case that a more farty was a
way of him for. TO cope with this suffering
or something along those lines. I, I'm not sure
if coping is the correct, uh, verb to use
here, but or to cope, but uh I mean,
what,
what do you think? Well, if you have to
cope, at least don't seethe. At least he didn't
see it. Yeah, yeah, but,
but I mean, what, what do you think about
that idea in particular and uh would you have
other cases in terms of trying to connect particular
aspects of his psychology to his philosophical ideas?
Yes, so not only do I think it's possible
to psychologize Nietzsche. I think it's demanded by his
method. I don't think he would, I don't think
if you thoroughly read, uh, Nietzsche that you can
get away with not inquiring as to what his
psychology is, given everything that he says, he's told
you, my philosophy, like all philosophy, is an involuntary
confession, an autobiography. So you have to read him
that way. And I think one of the best
works uh for doing this is Pierre Klozowski's uh
Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle. Now I will say
that work is. Difficult, it will be a slow
read, especially if you're not familiar with uh I'll
just say French philosophy in general and the way
that they like to write. I mean, uh, Klozowski
was, was Polish, but he lived in France. He
studied under Batai and, uh, so that's sort of
like his, his origins. And, uh, when I was,
uh, studying that book in order to produce an
episode on it, I did 3 episodes on that
book. I read the second chapter probably like 10
times because it's just so, uh, He makes some
very interesting claims about Nietzsche, the whole nature of
his struggle with like consciousness and conscious thinking and
all of these things. I think, so I think
he's a very, and then also going into like
the impetus for Nietzsche's like moral project or political
project, again, very provisional. This is his view of
that what Nietzsche was doing, but uh I would
recommend that book. Now, as far as like your
comments on. His illness, which, uh, yeah, could have
been perhaps catdicil congenital stroke disorder, perhaps a tumor,
perhaps something we're not even aware of. Perhaps we
will never know.
But we're certainly not sure of what, what it
was, right?
No, I, I don't think there's a way to
be sure, uh, because, you know, we just don't
have, uh, I mean, like if, if he had
died recently, you could like open up his brain
and, and probably glean some things from that, but,
but we just can't. We were like trying to
reconstruct what his illness was based on. LIKE medical
records, things he said to people and uh experiences
he reported and all of these things. What is
clear is that N Nietzsche's father died from symptoms
that seem at least similar to what happened to
Nietzsche, and then a year later, his younger brother,
who was only 1 or 2 years old, died.
Um, THAT was when Nietzsche was like 5 and
then 6 years old. Uh, SO, they both died
from like cramps, headaches. Uh, THE attending physician called
it liquefaction of the brain in the case of
his father, one of those sort of old-timey ways
of saying things that I, I take a perverse
pleasure in. But, um, That plagued him throughout his
life and it only got worse and worse. That's
why he retired from the university and the year
that he retired from the university, he explored a
number of like cures for his condition. He would
go to clinics. He ultimately, in Eke Homo talks
about he would kind of explore the right air
pressure, altitude, humidity, all of these things, and see
what made him feel better, what, what, you know,
because otherwise he could be laid out for days
with migraines and vomiting and stomach pain. Dizziness, he
went pretty much entirely blind in his right eye.
Um, AND so yeah, it was a very painful
existence, and you could interpret it as a morfati
is sort of him saying I have to live
with this, it is what it is. This is
the only way that I'm going to be able
to continue to, to, uh. Cope with my existence.
I would say the only complication of that is.
I mean, like, I think what Nietzsche would say
is like, OK, but Pretty much every philosopher, uh,
before me came around and said, Uh, yeah, that's
why this world sucks. That's why, uh, this is
a world of suffering and impermanence, and why you
shouldn't cling on to this world. We should hope
for an eternal life in which all the suffering
is relieved, and all accounts are settled. The lion
lays down with the lamb. Uh, IT'S the Sabbath
of Sabbaths, right? The rest of rests, that's what
awaits me at the end of my life, uh,
as for example, somebody like Pascal believed. Pascal also
suffered greatly, greatly throughout his life. Um, HE, I
believe in his case, May have exposed himself to
mercury, had some sort of mercury poisoning, but he
also, like with Pascal, it was like a, he
had, there was something psychologically like wrong with him,
probably manic depressive, and, you know, he would, uh,
like do self-mortification practices and stuff like that, and
he essentially just sees life as like, you know,
the condition of man, the suffering of man, the
mortality of man, it's a sort of a hell
hole, and if, if this is all there is,
like, I mean, it, there's nothing for us but
despair. So it is interesting that Nietzsche doesn't take
that view. So there, so I think you're right
to see that as Amor Fati is absolutely a
confession of Nietzsche's, is absolutely a revelation of his
psychology. His method demands that we see it that
way, but, I think it's we. Even if it
is a cope, we have to ask, why was
his method of coping. Sort of like worldly coping,
whereas you have Pascal.
No, that, that's a, that's a fair point, yeah,
yeah,
and, uh, I don't, I don't know if I
can actually. Tell you what it is about Nietzsche
that makes him so oriented towards, OK. Uh, THE
world, the intelligible world is a world of errors.
The impulses are where the real action is. Like
our, our consciousness is a commentary on an unknown
text. I affirm sensation and appearance. I don't affirm
this other world that devalues ours. Why is Nietzsche
so invested in this? And I mean, I think
It might have something to do with his sickness.
It, again, we, we might have to believe Nietzsche
to some extent, uh, take his own word for
it when he says that he's an expert in
sickness and health because he experiences these things himself,
contains sickness and recovery within his own body. Maybe.
To take it a step further, what it really
is, is that he perceives within himself that his
physiology is the cause of so many of his
thoughts. I think he might have had. An insight
that, especially as far as he was concerned, because
he would often do this, right? He would, he
would take notes in his journal. Of when his
thoughts came. And whether they were associated with high
feelings or low feelings. Or whether, like there's a
famous line from Nietzsche, which is a great line
on words to live by if you're looking for
some self-help. If there's somebody who came to watch
this video and they're like, 2 hours, I haven't
gotten any self-help advice. What the hell's going on?
I thought this was about Nietzsche.
Well, actually, if anyone comes to my channel to
get self-help, you're going to be disappointed.
Oh, no, I, I, yeah, I'm not saying that.
I'm just saying so many of the people when
they find Nietzsche, one of my favorite things I
saw, uh, it's like a Uh, like a course
on Nietzsche that was like, learn N Nietzsche to
unlock your potential seven steps to self-mastery, something like
that. And that was like posted by like a
popular like it was like Nietzsche and philosophy Twitter
account or whatever. That's just, it's so common that
that's what people want out of Nietzsche. So that's
why I'm saying that, uh, and I think, yeah,
but in any case, uh, Great advice from him
is that again, it's something he says about himself,
but it's something that we could all take uh
from. He says he trusts no thought that comes
to him while he's sitting still. That he's learned
that his best thoughts come to him while he's
walking and hiking and moving. That's when he can
really trust the thoughts that come to him. And
so I think perhaps if we were to look
at maybe specifically his illness as a like psychological
cause of much of his philosophy, I think it's
because he, he does have this thing of experimenting
on himself, experimenting on his body, and then experimenting
with his thoughts, like, where are my thoughts coming
from? That might be a lot of why, and
so he learns that there's like this physiological origin.
Which again, uh, Sciences would probably agree with these
days that uh a lot of your thinking is
done by your gut. But I think, you know,
if we want to be critical, which is sort
of often what people are asking for when they
ask you to psychologize Nietzsche. Perhaps he may have
gone too far in his convictions that everything is
rooted in the physiological, that every idea we have
is simply a question of our constitution or or
or our impulses, that everything is about uh simply
sensation and like the world as it appears, and
we should just like eschew all of these eternal
ideas of the intelligible world or all of this
is be suspicious towards it, all morality, all of
this. Maybe he went a little far because his
whole world was dominated by physiology. He was sort
of He knew more than anyone that he was
sort of. Chained to bound by his physiology. So
that perhaps would be a way of psychologizing him.
Yeah, great. So, look, Keegan, uh, let's perhaps wrap
up the conversation here. We've already done a little
bit over 2 hours, so, uh, I will be
leaving links to your YouTube channel and your Twitter
slash X handle handle. What, what other places on
the internet can people find you on?
Well, uh, if you just type in the Nietzsche
podcast or untimely Reflections into Google, you can find
it on Spotify, Apple Podcasts, all these things, um.
I also, uh, will be another place people can
find me, uh, this January. I'm not sure when
this episode will be coming out, but the episodes
will be archived.
Uh, IT, it will come out in mid-December, so
next week, the week after we're recording. So,
so, uh, this January, I'm going to be teaching
a course, a series of 4 courses at Acid
Horizon Research Commons. It's a para-academic, uh, society. Uh,
I'm going to be one of the first this
year for the spring session. Um, ALONGSIDE, I'm trying
to remember what the other courses are, there's, there's
stuff on Kant, there's stuff on philosophy and magic.
There's all sorts of really cool courses that they're
teaching there, and Craig, who runs Asset Horizon, is
a really great guy and really. Really doing it
for the love of the game and love of
philosophy. And so, uh, that will be something that
people have to pay for, but, uh, that's something
I'm very excited about. I've I've never taught an
online course before, or you could say I've been
doing it for 4 years, but, uh, you know,
however you want to interpret it, so that I
have that coming up and I'm very excited. That
will be another place that people can find me
in the immediate future.
Great. Uh, LOOKING forward to that and thank you
so much for coming on the show. I mean,
as I said, I've been following your show, your
channel and podcast for 3 years or so now,
and I've been, I've been looking forward to this
conversation, so thank you so
much. Thank you, absolutely. It was a, it was
a great joy.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Sverggoo, and
Hal Herz Agnon, Michel Jonathan Labrarinth, John Yardston, and
Samuel Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel,
Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego
Londono Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro,
Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank,
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro,
Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.